Refresh Dynamic Config page (#6603)
circleci/circleci-docs: jekyll/_cci2/dynamic-config.md

description: "Docs page on using Setup Workflows for Dynamic Configuration"
version:
- Cloud
- Server v3.x
---

Instead of manually creating an individual CircleCI configuration per project, you might prefer in some cases to generate these configurations dynamically, depending on specific [pipeline values]({{ site.baseurl }}/2.0/pipeline-variables/) or file paths.

CircleCI's dynamic configuration feature allows you to:

> - Execute conditional workflows/commands
> - Pass pipeline parameter values and/or generate additional configuration
> - Trigger separate `config.yml` configurations which exist outside the default parent `.circleci/` directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Execute conditional workflows/commands.
- Pass pipeline parameter values and/or generate additional configuration.
- Trigger separate `config.yml` configurations, which exist outside the default parent `.circleci/` directory.
```

This becomes particularly helpful in cases where your team is using a monorepo, or a single repository, as opposed to using multiple repositories to store your code.

For instance, you may want to use dynamic configuration to trigger certain workflows based on which files or subdirectories have changed in your repository. Otherwise, all of your microservices/sub-projects would go through the entirety of your build, test, and deployment processes when any single update is introduced. This scenario is also referred to as _path filtering_.

> Another scenario in which you could use dynamic configuration is when your project consists multiple modules, where each module requires a separate job. These jobs could be stored in multiple files as _fragments_ of a configuration. Instead of using one full `.circleci/config.yml` file, you could use dynamic configuration to combine these individual fragments into a full configuration when a pipeline is triggered. This scenario can also be referred to as _config splitting_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another scenario in which you could use dynamic configuration is when your project consists of multiple modules, where each module requires a separate job. These jobs could be stored in multiple files as _fragments_ of a configuration. Instead of using one full `.circleci/config.yml` file, you could use dynamic configuration to combine these individual fragments into a full configuration when a pipeline is triggered. This scenario can also be referred to as _config splitting_.
```

  <br>
  ![Enable dynamic config in the UI]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/docs/dynamic-config-enable.png)

5. While the steps above will make the feature available, your static `config.yml` will continue to work as normal. This feature will **not** be used until you add the `setup` key with a value of `true` to that `config.yml`.
  Adding the key `setup: true` to the top level of your parent configuration file (in the `.circleci/` directory) will designate that `config.yml` as a setup configuration.
6. At the end of the `setup` workflow, a `continue` job from the [`continuation` orb](https://circleci.com/developer/orbs/orb/circleci/continuation) must be called. **NOTE:** This does _not_ apply if you want to conditionally execute workflows or steps based on **updates to specified files** ("path filtering"), as described in the [Configuration Cookbook]({{ site.baseurl }}/2.0/configuration-cookbook/?section=examples-and-guides#execute-specific-workflows-or-steps-based-on-which-files-are-modified) example.

## How dynamic config works
{: #how-dynamic-config-works }

> CircleCI's dynamic configuration feature uses setup workflows. A setup workflow can contain jobs that compute pipeline parameters, which can then be passed into an additional configuration that potentially exists in other directories. A setup workflow can also be used to generate new configurations via pre-existing scripts.

Reviewer: Maybe use italics for "setup workflow" and "continuation" as they have specific meanings?

Behind the scenes, the continuation configuration is implemented as a call to a public pipeline continuation API. This API accepts a continuation key, which is a secret, unique-per-pipeline key that is automatically injected into the environment of jobs executed as part of a setup workflow. It also accepts a configuration string, as well as a set of pipeline parameters.

Note that:
- The setup phase requires `version: 2.1` or higher.

> - A pipeline can only be continued once (i.e. a pipeline cannot be continued with another setup configuration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A pipeline can only be continued once (that is, a pipeline cannot be continued with another setup configuration).
```

- A pipeline can only be continued within six hours of its creation.
- The setup configuration can only include one workflow.

> - Pipeline parameters submitted at continuation time cannot overlap with pipeline parameters submitted at trigger (i.e. setup) time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Pipeline parameters submitted at continuation time cannot overlap with pipeline parameters submitted at trigger (setup) time.
```

- Cloud
---

> Instead of manually creating an individual CircleCI configuration per project, you might prefer in some cases to generate these configurations dynamically, depending on specific [pipeline parameters]({{ site.baseurl }}/2.0/pipeline-variables/) or file paths.

Author: @sulami To make sure I'm following - is there a specific reason for using "values" instead of "parameters"? For instance I noticed that this [Discuss post](https://discuss.circleci.com/t/intro-to-dynamic-config-via-setup-workflows/39868) refers to pipeline parameters. It does look like either pipeline parameters or values could be used... would "pipeline variables" be a better option here?

> Instead of manually creating an individual CircleCI configuration per project, you might prefer in some cases to generate these configurations dynamically, depending on specific [pipeline parameters]({{ site.baseurl }}/2.0/pipeline-variables/) or file paths.

Reviewer 2: Pipeline parameters are declared and set by the user, pipeline values are implicitly declared and set by us. Technically there's no term encompassing both, though they can be used interchangeably everywhere. I'm okay with calling the union of those two sets pipeline variables.

CircleCI's dynamic configuration feature allows you to:

- Execute conditional workflows/commands
- Pass pipeline parameter values and/or generate additional configuration
- Trigger separate `config.yml` configurations which exist outside the default parent `.circleci/` directory

> This becomes particularly useful in cases where your team is using a monorepo, or a single repository, as opposed to using multiple repositories to store your code. In the case of using a monorepo, it would be optimal to only trigger certain builds in specific areas of your project. Otherwise, all of your microservices/sub-projects would go through the entirety of your build, test, and deployment processes when any single update is introduced.

Author: @sulami Thanks - agreed, this does seem like path filtering is the only scenario involved. My next commit is going to attempt to point out path filtering as a specific use case.

4. Scroll to the **Enable dynamic config using setup workflows** setting, and toggle it to the "on" position, as shown below:
  <br>
  ![Enable dynamic config in the UI]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/docs/dynamic-config-enable.png)

5. While the steps above will make the feature available, your static `config.yml` will continue to work as normal. This feature will **not** be used until you add the `setup` key with a value of `true` to that `config.yml`.
  Adding the key `setup: true` to the top level of your parent configuration file (in the `.circleci/` directory) will designate that `config.yml` as a setup configuration.
6. At the end of the `setup` workflow, a `continue` job from the [`continuation` orb](https://circleci.com/developer/orbs/orb/circleci/continuation) must be called. **NOTE:** This does _not_ apply if you want to conditionally execute workflows or steps based on **updates to specified files**, as described in the [Configuration Cookbook]({{ site.baseurl }}/2.0/configuration-cookbook/?section=examples-and-guides#execute-specific-workflows-or-steps-based-on-which-files-are-modified) example.

## How dynamic config works
{: #how-dynamic-config-works }

> CircleCI's dynamic configuration feature uses setup workflows. A setup workflow can contain jobs that compute pipeline parameters, which can then be passed into an additional configuration that potentially exists in other directories. A setup workflow can also be used to generate follow-up pipelines via pre-existing scripts.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't talk about follow-up pipelines, they're a different and confusing concept in this context.

Reviewer 2: On the other hand it might be worth mentioning that not only pipeline parameters can be generated, the entire config can be generated within the setup workflow.

**Q:** I thought pipeline parameters could only be used with the API?

**A:** Previously, this was true. With the dynamic configuration feature, you can now set pipeline parameters dynamically, before the pipeline is executed (triggered from either the API or a webhook—a push event to your VCS).

### Custom executors
{: #custom-executors}

**Q:** Can I use a custom executor?

**A:** Custom executors can be used, but require certain dependencies to be installed for the continuation step to work (currently: `curl`, `jq`).

### The continuation orb
{: #the-continuation-orb }

**Q:** What is the `continuation` orb?

> **A:** The `continuation` orb assists CircleCI users in managing the pipeline continuation process easily. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**A:** The `continuation` orb assists you in managing the pipeline continuation process. The
```
